men need to understand the average age
of the father has gone up about three
and a half years and with that the
chance of problems with the child also
can increase then that pregnancy becomes
a lot riskier and this is why Dr Michael
Eisenberg is an expert in male sexual
function and fertility who's helping us
to learn the truth about optimal Sexual
Health if you just look at all the data
sperm counts are declining but low sperm
counts and low testosterone could have
devastating effects for example men with
lower semen quality have higher risk of
death wow and there's a lot of really
interesting questions that need to be
answered okay let's get into that is
there any evidence that the chemicals in
our environment are impacting our sperm
count now testosterone levels yes it's a
chemical that's in a lot of creams and
lotions that we use and then there's a
chemical that's used in the manufacturer
of plastic and that could have pretty
devastating effects and so don't drink
out of plastic water bottles what about
paros couldn't figure out if low
testosterone or high testosterone causes
a receding hairline most men are not
going to in like this but it turns out
that if I'm sat down all day is that
going to have an impact on my sperm C
there are studies that do support that I
would say take breaks stand up to try
and air out the area what can I do to
give myself the best possible chance of
increasing my fertility so there's a lot
that we can do and usually we start with
and then erectile dysfunction hundreds
of millions of men all over the world
have trouble with directions but as long
as you have a penis we can always make
it hard for example we can teach men to
give
themselves ooh I just got shiver down my
body but it probably works 80 to 90% of
the
time congratul ulations Dio gang we've
made some progress 63% of you that
listen to this podcast regularly don't
subscribe which is down from
69% our goal is 50% so if you've ever
liked any of the videos we've posted if
you like this channel can you do me a
quick favor and hit the Subscribe button
it helps this channel more than you know
and the bigger the channel gets as
you've seen the bigger the guests get
thank you and enjoy this episode
[Music]
Dr Michael
Eisenberg why do you do what you do and
what you do it's a pleasure to be here
certainly an honor um I kind of see
myself as a researcher and advocate for
Men's Health men's reproductive Health
sexual health and so you know I think
when I see patients in clinic that's
what I'm trying to do to try and
understand where they're coming from any
issues they have and find out ways that
we can you know work and improve them
together and certainly from my research
perspective I always want to you know
try and Define what the issues are um
and just improve our treatments that we
have for men I am the director of male
reproductive and Sexual Health at
Stanford or Men's Health uh in the
Department of Urology um I have a joint
appointment in the department of obstetr
and Gynecology because fertility is a
team sport and so I also help you know
couples and I refer women to the female
side and just like I you know get lots
of referrals from them you know when
we're kind of worried about the male
partner when you say sort of
reproductive Health what what are all
the sort of things that fall within that
bucket or underneath that
umbrella so I think you know
reproductive Health really I mean I
guess as it sort of name implies would
be you know trying to have a baby um but
I think it's so much more than that
because I think what we're really
learning is that you know fertility is
kind of a window into future health
probably about 10% of the male genome is
devoted to reproduction um and given
there's only about 25,000 genes in the
body you know it makes sense that some
genes that are operating in reproduction
also operate in another organ system
there was a study done where they took
biopsies of men that had troubl making
sperm and tried to sort of replicate
these cells and they found that these
cells had very high rates of mutations
in their DNA so you can imagine you know
sort of for checks and balances when
we're making sperm it makes sense if you
can't sort of faithfully replicate your
DNA you know there's probably not
there's probably going to be some blocks
where you can't make a sperm right if
there's going to be mutations but also
these men may be set up for other
problems right like cancers or something
like that if you know the body can't you
know effectively replicate cells or DNA
there could also be sort of hormonal
links and that's another thing that we
commonly look at when we're evaluating
men uh with infertility um infertile Men
actually have lower testosterone levels
than fertile men so you know there's
also been studies show that men with
lower testosterone levels have you know
sort of lower survival so it may be that
you know kind of hormonal links between
fertility May kind of put men on a
different you know trajectory you know
another I think very sort of important
aspect of reproduction you there's other
kind of what I call sort of social
factors that are sort of at play um you
know things that kind of necessarily go
with reproduction so like having a
partner um and having kids hopefully and
it turns out that those factors actually
are very important for Health and
Longevity so um like having a partner
actually increases survival so if you
like compare sort of if you have like a
you know a man with a partner and a
child if you then take away the partner
the chance of that man dying goes up 60
% and then if you take away just a child
the chance of him dying goes up
60% but it turns out if there both of
those things are absent that man has a
three-fold higher risk of death than
somebody with a partner and a
child so there's really kind of this
sort of important aspect I think to
health and reproduction I think that men
kind of need to understand and then
obviously there's also just a lot of you
know kind of um intrinsic things that we
do like lifestyle Behavior obesity
smoking those are all very important um
for health as well um so I think you
know when I see these men for
reproduction I really try and broaden it
a little bit to overall health because I
think there's certainly data that you
know as we improve a man's health we'll
improve their reproduction um and
hopefully give them a baby but also you
know improve their overall you know
survival Health everything so how many
patients have you seen in your career if
you had to Hazard a guess roughly oh I
mean I think it would probably be
mean tens of thousands I would guess
maybe 20 30,000 and how many years have
you been working on this subject of sort
of male Health fertility uh reproductive
Health all these kind of about probably
10 to 15 years it feels like the world
has kind of turned towards your work
more so in the last couple of years than
ever before it feels like you you just
so happen to be doing research and
educating people on a space that quite
suddenly relatively suddenly has become
really important to people and I was
even looking at some of the data around
sort of testosterone replacement
therapies and how that's just absolutely
skyrocketed in recent times and also the
conversation around fertility I was
looking at the data around fertility how
many people are searching out for
information on it and it's skyrocketed
over the last what five years and even
in my circle of friends we weren't
talking about fertility or testosterone
or sperm count even two years ago
whereas this year and then last sort of
12 months it's been a frequent topic of
conversation why is this and is my
assessment there accurate and can that
be supported with what you're seeing I
mean I think so I you know obviously I
guess I would say I'm biased and that I
think this is um you know very
interesting and I think you know there
is a lot of momentum towards us you know
there have been a lot of landmark
studies suggesting like you say declines
in testosterone over time uh declines in
sperm count over time and we can
certainly talk about that um a little
bit more and I think with that you know
um there's been really an explosion in
assisted reproductive Technologies you
know I'm familiar you know in the United
States how that's happening you know a
few years ago it was you know maybe
about half percent of all bursts in the
i in the US were conceived with IVF now
it's about 2% and only increasing you
know it used to be that insurance never
covered it now Insurance commonly covers
it and so with that there's just really
been explosion in the offerings the
number of cycles that are done you know
and in my particular area in Northern
California you know it seems like every
year a new IVF Clinic um is opening up
and you're always worried and wondering
how could there be enough business to
support it but instantly you know all
the patients you know all the slots are
filled they're booked out for six months
and I think there's just tremendous
amount of demand and I think that you
know I think to your point you know the
question really is why you know is is
fertility declining are more couples
becoming riing on IVF um and I think you
know again our sperm counts declining I
think all those things are probably kind
of going together
um that's leading to this and I think
it's you know it's something that we're
doing to ourselves potentially there's
some environmental exposure I think all
these things are you know really
interesting questions that that need to
be answered so let's start with why then
if we stay zoomed out a little bit on
some of the social factors that might be
leading to um infertility issues but
also just correlated issues like things
like testosterone and all of these
things what are some of the broader
social factors that are causing IVF
clinics to become so in demand now yeah
I mean I think one of the big ones would
just be uh Rising parental age um you
know
uh there's been sort of less data I
think on male age over time at least
here in the United States but um you
know a few years ago there was a study
done where it showed that over the last
maybe 30 40 years the average age of the
father has gone up about three and a
half years um it used to be like in the
70s you know the an older father and
that would be considered over 40 was
maybe about 4 % of bursts now it's
probably 9 10% of bursts so I think
there's just more delay and with that um
you know infertility gets higher there's
usually a close correlation between you
know a mother's age and a father's age
and so you know I think a lot of people
are sort of familiar as women get older
um you know fertility goes down probably
at a steeper rate but for men the same
thing happens you know sperm counts get
a little lower testosterone gets a
little lower takes a little longer to
conceive you know the chance of problems
with the CH the child also can increase
I mean the oldest father ever is 96 so
the biologic potential does persist um
but it certainly gets a little bit more
difficult in that pregnancy becomes a
lot riskier what is the rate of decline
in men and women um in terms of
fertility so I think you know if your
guest you're looking from an
evolutionary standpoint you know Peak
fertility probably be late teens early
20s something like that and so for women
you know they're born with a set number
of eggs and so as soon as you know
Cycles start they continue to lose them
over time and so usually we think about
you know over 30 35 40 you know those
are pretty big points where fertility
gets a little bit more challenging for
men you know we the the sperm counts do
decline you know why this sort of cut
off where we say older father is 40 is
sort of a constellation of sort of
different risks you know the sperm
counts get a little bit lower but the
other thing that happens is every year
um you know we're born with sort of
sperm precursors or sperm stem cells in
our body and they are constantly
replicated every year and every time
that happens there's some chance of a
mutation occurring so it turns out that
you know every year we probably
accumulate sort of two mutations in our
DNA and so over time you know that
becomes a little riskier so for like a
40-year-old is going to have 20 more
mutations than a 30-year-old for example
so we have you know billions of base
pairs of DNA in our body so the chance
of you know 20 you know mutations making
a difference is probably pretty low um
but you know that's at an individual
level at a population level that's
something that you may start to see and
so for men I think it is just sort of a
slow steady decline you know again
probably in the 30s 40s do you have the
data on the oldest ever mother are you
the oldest ever woman to conceive a
child so with uh using like a donor egg
I think it's 60s or even even in the 70s
I think it's been described before but I
think with her own egg I think it's late
50s early 60s are you concerned about
this as a macro Trend because if we play
this forward it would lead us to a
assume that fertility is going to be an
increasing problem for
society yeah I mean I think very much so
right it's existential I mean you know
as a disclaimer obviously I'm in the
fertility business so um you know I do
certainly care about this trend and want
to make sure that we reverse it it's a
risk factor that we know about but I
think you know the the solution is not
obvious right because asking couples to
delay careers education all that is very
challenging you know I think some
countries have try to come up with you
know ways to support you know Parenthood
you know through leave or you know other
kind of programs like that child care
also becomes uh you know very important
um but even with those I think that um
there's just sort of a perception it's
just it's not as easy as you'd think and
it turns out actually that you know the
return on investment for some of these
things you know having a child is so
kind of important for the health of a
society right there's some there's this
concept called replacement rate that's
the number of children that need to be
born to a reprodu age women to maintain
a population's level sort of this is
kind of ignoring immigration so it turns
out you need about 2.1 children per
reproductive age women for a population
level to stay the same so if you in some
societies it's lower like in the US it's
a little lower than that and some um
like Asian countries like Korea JP Japan
it's lower than that and that's really
existential because if you know if your
working population starts to decline um
you know tax Spas everything you know
will really collapse and so from an
economic standpoint it makes sense if
these are couples that want to have kids
and they you know these are wanted
children you know to try and invest in
you know allowing them to do that really
makes sense because you
know it'll it'll kind of pay it back it
is at a societal level I read about in
Hungary that if you have four or more
babies then you'll pay no income tax for
the rest of your life according to the
Prime Minister it's an article that I'd
seen and I think this is speaks to a
broader trend of how there's going to be
a topown approach towards getting us to
be get back to having babies to stop the
population collapse and decline that you
talked about um hungary's prime minister
has announced a raft of measures aimed
at boosting the country's declining
birth rate and reducing immigration and
one of them is that essentially you'll
get be given a check and you only have
to pay that check back if you don't have
four kids so for every kid you have 25%
of the money that you're given is
discounted and once you get to full kids
you never have to pay income tax again
which I thought was a
really interesting idea but it's a sign
of things to come yeah yeah I mean it's
fascinating right I mean I think that
these you know the economic ministers
Prime Ministers are really thinking
about things I'm sure they've looked at
the numbers right and realize that um
you Society really relies on you know
maintaining numbers and when you know
when the population starts to slip could
be a problem I mean I think that's it's
a very clever solution
sperm
quality sperm quality I read is
declining yeah so that's a very it's
interesting because that's such a
controversial statement uh you know I
think there is a tremendous amount of
data that supports that a number of
years ago I was actually involved in a
study looking at data from a sperm bank
here in the United States um it was a
sperm bank that was in uh the
northeastern us at a few locations and
it wasn't a lot of data it was just sort
of a few years of data um about like a
little over maybe 10 15 years but what
what we found is that actually if you
looked at men that were coming in to try
and be donors because you know these
Banks they're very selective so you have
to have you know excellent sperm that
freezes well that thaws well really high
numbers and you know they also look at
your pedigree a little make sure there
aren't conditions to run your family
they like you to be fit you know these
are kind of things that are thought to
you know sort of make make a better
donor um and when we looked at sort of
the candidates that came in over this
you know really short period of time
probably 10 15 years there was declines
in you know sperm counts um you know the
movement shape all these sort of
parameters that we look at when we're
talking about a seman analysis and what
was interesting is that you know when
people have talked about declines in
sperm count people have sort of
attributed to different things for
example people have talked about the
Obesity epidemic right and that maybe
we're more sedentary now than we used to
be or you know environmental exposures
or another thing there's more chemicals
now than it used to be or cell phone
prevalence and things like that but you
know over this short period of time
where we did have you know a lot of
information on these men they filled out
surveys um you know they filled out kind
of Rich family histories they filled out
information about whether they drank a
lot smoked a lot things like that
there's really no differences in these
men you know from the beginning of the
study to the end the only difference was
that their sperm counts were lower so it
was really you know kind of surprising
um very interesting and so you know
other investigators have used studies
like that kind of pulled them all
together using kind of advanced
statistical techniques and found this
decline over time um you know over the
last maybe 20 30 40 50 years um so there
is a preponderance of data that supports
that so the counterargument that others
have made is that you know over that
same period of time some of our
techniques have changed right we're
better at counting sperm now than we
used to be you know some of the
different um you know tools that we use
to measure sperm count some of the
analyzers are better now than they used
to be so we're a little bit more precise
than we used to be the other um you know
thing that these Studies have done is
when they pull together data they assume
that you know everybody's the same like
right if we were both in the study they
would assume that I'm like you you're
like me but it turns out that there's a
lot of variation based on like region so
there was a study in the United States
where they looked at fathers so men that
had kids at different regions of the
country you know like had some in
California New York some in the Midwest
and even though these were all fathers
similar ages the sperm quality was much
different turned out it was really high
and in New York I think California was
next and the Midwest was a lot lower um
so so you know again why you think that
right New York would be kind of hustle
bustle Metropolis maybe they would have
some poor risk factors but turns out
they had the best sperm and so why that
is is you know wasn't certain but it
just shows us that there's a lot of
variation in seon quality from
individuals so when you put things
together sometimes it can be difficult
to you know to identify Trends so
ideally what we do is you know I and my
neighbor would give sperm maybe every
year every 5 years 10 years over time
and you'd see what changed um and those
studies aren't ail so that's sort of the
criticism of these studies but again if
if you just look at all the data if you
compare studies from the you 70s ' 80s
90s to today sperm counts are lower what
is the current best guess as to why
sperm counts are lower yeah I think
that's the million-dollar question
because I you know we've talked about
this is sort of an existential
existential threat right we need a you
know I think any species has sort of
three main functions right eat survive
reproduce you eat to survive you survive
to reproduce spread your DNA and so if
you can't do that it's definitely going
to be an issue so you know I think that
we've talked about you know maybe
obesity I think we're certainly
different now than we used to be you in
terms of walking around you know um
sedentary Behavior people have you know
hypothesized different chemicals in the
environment are kind of leeching into
our food supply our water supply is
there any evidence for that that the
chemicals in our environment are
impacting our sperm count and our
testosterone levels and things like that
yeah there are there are studies uh that
do support that um you know there are
certainly like pre-clinical studies you
know where you can actually you know
dose like rats um and mice these there's
also human studies where you can you
know compare sperm quality to you know
different sort of chemical traces in the
blood and see these correlations as well
and then there's um a study called enh
Hanes which is a a study by our Centers
for Disease Control where every year men
and women are sort of surveyed or they
collect data on Obesity blood pressure
things like that um and they do collect
data on sort of chemical exposures for
these you know select group of
individuals that kind of represent the
whole population this has been done for
the last you know many many decades and
so when we talk about obesity kind of
rising in prevalence in the United
States it's been it's based on that data
this is kind of a rigorously sort of
researched you know group of individuals
it's selected every year and so those
same studies collect data on
testosterone or estrogen for women and
they collect it on these different
environmental chemicals and do see these
correlations I would say that not every
study supports this but there are
certainly a good number that do show
that um there is this correlation that
if you have higher exposure to some of
these chemicals uh there's higher risk
of lower hormone levels what are those
chemicals and where do we find them CU I
I I spoke to someone who was a urologist
recently um I think from NYU and they
were telling me that things like the
microplastics and I'm not particularly
aware of what a microplastic is to be
honest but things like microplastics in
our environment are some of the
chemicals that are causing sperm quality
to reduce mhm is there evidence to
support that there's a lot of different
chemicals to be sort of concerned about
or think about I think you know
microplastics are one phalates what is
aite aite is it's a chemical that's in a
lot of like um you know different uh
like creams and lotions that we use um
and so those also have been shown to
affect Androgen you know and kind of
endocrine function inside the body uh
bisphenol a is a you know a common
chemical that's used in the manufacturer
of plastic and that's also been found to
have these endocrine disrupting
properties um so that's also been
correlated with Sean quality endocrine
disrupting endocrine disrupting what
does that mean so you know if you look
at sort of Pathways for men and women
there's you know hormones right I'm
making testosterone and that acts on my
body as I was a child to help make me a
man now it kind of helps you know keep
me a man you know with grow a beard all
those sorts of things giving me my U my
deeper voice um and so there's some of
these chemicals that kind of mimic some
of that action or block some of that
action and so if that happens um it can
affect you know normal development of
you know boys or girls you know maybe
you know again affect sort of semen
quality if we think about sort of the
origins of changes in semen quality some
of it may be when we're adults but some
of it also could be during development
you know either when we're developing
inside of our mothers or you know during
puberty if something kind of affects the
normal timing of that it could be you
know again could have pretty devastating
effects and so one theory for that is
some of these chemicals that affect
these sort of biologic Pathways these
endocrine Pathways involved in that from
the research you've seen on sort of
these chemicals is there any changes
that you've made in your own life at all
anything that you it's kind of made you
think differently about the choices you
make in your own life with your kids
because you got three kids so you have
an opportunity to kind of influence them
at a at a earlier stage than most of us
can influence ourselves but yeah so one
thing that we do um is I've thrown away
all plastic water bottles I I'd say I
still use it because I find them very
convenient um and I'm done with
reproduction but um but certainly for
the kids um I make sure they don't drink
out of plastic water bottle so we have
either glass or um or metal I do think
there is data that that's um you know a
very you know large exposure that kids
get and I think it's you know fairly
easy now to remove that what does the
data say about plastic bottles you know
if you look at um you know exposures
from that you know they have they just
leech a tremendous amount you know with
wash with water it kind of sits there
all day so I think it's a it's a very
you know again most plastic water
bottles want the you know plastic bottle
industry to come after us but um that's
a common way for you know individuals to
get exposed to it so I think if again if
we're saying that's one of the main
touch points for Plastics um is is
usually through our kind of food and
water supply then yeah I think it's easy
to to get rid of it if you
can is there anything else I I I've read
recently that heat has a a role in our
sort of sperm quality so if we're don't
know if we're going into saers or
something or if we're spending a lot of
time I don't know sunbathing then
there's science that suggests that will
lower our sperm count yeah so that is
right so I mean I think that you know gu
you can kind of look at this sort of in
a bigger sort of global warming kind of
context and people have you know
theorized that maybe that could also
play a role because you know the
testicles are outside the body because
they need to be a few degrees cooler for
sperm production to occur so anything
that warms them up can definitely be a
problem um so when I talk to patients in
clinic for example we do talk about Saun
use hot tub use some men bathe every day
like in a bath um and those all can
impact sperm production there there have
been studies to show that men that you
know use you know saunas on a regular
basis they have lower sperm counts and
then when you withdraw that exposure um
sperm counts will go back to normal one
you know sort of interesting application
of this was to try and use this data or
use that knowledge to come up with a
contraceptive so there was this weird
sort of like truss kind of belt that
actually pushed the testicles up into
the groin um which actually turned out
did reduce sperm counts uh to zero I
think and again the the few men that
that volunteered to do that um but you
can imagine I think most men are not
going to be too excited about that um
because it's probably pretty
uncomfortable uh the other way that I've
seen it is I've had patients that have
gotten sick certainly around covid that
happened not infrequently men would come
in you know telling me that you know
they just got over a covid infection
that where they had high fevers for you
know a few weeks um and then their sperm
csed be very low and then you know we
wait a few months it takes about two to
three months to make a sperm so we let
one of those Cycles or two of those
Cycles go through and their sperm counts
came back I had a patient even before
covid uh like 41y old guy he had normal
sperm count and then all of a sudden he
measured and the sperm count had gone to
zero and it turns out he had a a flu
with fevers about 102 degrees Fahrenheit
um the week before and again we let kind
of sort of nature take his course he
recovered and then his sperm counts came
back to Baseline so we do see that um as
well with that belt that you mentioned
that it holds the sort of test testicles
closer to the body I'm guessing it's
doing that to heat them up basically
which reduces the sperm count MH
obviously then one would think about
their boxer shorts we're all wearing
very tight boxer shorts these days
that's like invogue or whatever so is
there any studies to suggest that boxy
shorts can reduce sperm count if they're
tight so that's like a very Comm that's
one of the most common questions I get
like boxers versus briefs and that's
been studied a lot because that is a
very common exposure I think I usually
just tell men whatever is comfortable I
think it's unlikely that any single
layer is going to make a big difference
unless again you have the specially
designed underwear that pushes testicles
up into the groin but otherwise as long
as they're outside the body it should be
okay what about mobile
phones and technology is there any um
link between fertility and are use of
Technology specifically having these
devices in our pockets close to our
genitals that's you know another common
question that I get um and that is
certainly something that's changed right
now versus you know 20 30 years ago uh
so there were some studies that you know
initially showed kind of this signal
that men that use cell phones more had
lower sperm count but some of these
studies were you know they're older and
you also worry about some of these kind
of confounding things it may be that
people that use phones more do other
things more you know they have may have
more stress in their life and other
things that could affect SE quality so
there was a clever study that was done
where they actually took ejaculate so
took sperm put it in a cup and put a
cell phone next to it and tried to
measure changes in you know the quality
of the sperm and they actually did find
some they found higher rates of like DNA
damage within the sperm that was exposed
to the the phone versus not you know
kind of trying to control for
temperature which we you know said is
important for the health of the sperm
wait so they controlled for temperature
they controlled for temperature and just
having kind of the cell phone you know
getting its signal um seemed to affect
you know the DNA damage in sperm it
wasn't you know it was a statistically
significant you know difference um it
maybe would not be kind of a point where
we would get as worried clinically but
it is a change so I think it's something
to think about I think that um you know
aside from that cell phones I think
nowadays don't get too hot so not as
worried about heat but whether this RF
you know this radio frequency exposure
may impact things is a you know maybe a
theoretical risk but I gu there's not a
lot of concrete data so I think that you
know again if so a lot of my patients do
tell me that they keep their try and
keep their cell phone in their back
pocket or front pocket to try and avoid
that I think that's I think that's fine
I've been having this conversation with
my partner a lot she really believes
that my cell phone should never be slid
under my genitals which I sometimes do
when I'm like I don't know when I'm in
the car or something or when I'm on the
sofa I don't know when I've got my hands
full I'll just grab it and I'll kind of
like slide it between my legs yeah and
she'll
reach in and pull it out and say and I
think because she's concerned about
those four kids that we want to have and
you I think she cares about you too yeah
I to be fair she's not someone that's
going to read PubMed and read about the
studies but it's just a feeling she has
yeah and I always refuted it and thought
now there's no way there's no way
because they would have tested it and
the test seems so easy you get sperm you
put it in a little thing you put the
phone on top of it send it some text
messages connected to the Wi-Fi the
Bluetooth and see how the sperm get on
yeah I didn't realize there was a study
asso with it yeah I think laptops also
can do that too but they also have a
little more heat associated with it so a
similar study was done in laptops um
where they had sperm put it next to a
laptop and they controlled for
temperature uh and saw the same pattern
you know again sort of the Wi-Fi signal
can also affect again sperm you know DNA
damage and sperm quality um but also you
know laptops can get warm too right some
of the batteries some of the moving
Parts within uh can heat up too and it
also just serves as almost like
insulation if you put it over your lap
so I do talk to patients about that as
well um you know to maybe use like a
pillow or something else just to try and
shield yourself a little bit wouldn't we
see a sort of big difference between hot
countries and cold countries or sort of
warm countries and sperm counts then so
if I in sort of subsaharan Africa I'm
assuming my sperm count will be pretty
low because I'm going to be sweating all
day so I think that um the other sort of
element to that though is that there are
differences in populations and I think
that that has not been well described
you know but if you compare you know
again we talked about California New
York the Midwest and the United States
but people have also compared you know
like Denmark which they have a lot of
sort of problems with reproduction so
they've really studied it very very
aggressively and if you compare them to
other countries nearby or other
countries in Europe it's much different
and so you know one possibility could be
exposures you know and what these men
are doing what they're exposed to but
the other could be you know again there
could be some genetic components but one
interesting thing about sort of on that
same line is that uh sperm quality does
vary based on uh time of year so during
the hotter months it does go down a
little bit you know not meaningfully um
and then during the cooler months it it
goes up a little bit but the other thing
is that you know we don't spend well
some of us do I guess or some of us
don't but no spend all your time
Outdoors right and sometimes in the um
you know during the the cooler months
you're you know kind of bundled up
inside and during the warmer months
you're may be in you know cool air
conditioning did you say that this
Denmark has had a problem with sperm
count yes yeah so um you know in the
United States I said that about 2% of
bursts are conceived with IVF in Denmark
it's about 10% wow um and it's actually
they they've again they have really a
crisis of reproduction there so they've
really um done some really good research
on seam quality and it estimated that
only about 25% of Danish men have normal
Sean
quality have they figured out why that's
what they're looking into and they have
lots of theories and again I think you
know again it goes to many of these same
topics that we talked about whether it's
environmental exposures on you know
mothers um or you again pubertal boys or
you know adults as well so they are
trying to figure it out but it is you
know that's also one of the countries
where the fertility rate is is below
replacement so it's definitely an issue
one would assume that it's some kind of
environmental factor I guess it could be
some other social Factor but but one
would assume that it's some kind of
environmental yeah Factor yeah some
people have postulated during World War
II they were very isolated and so
potentially there were some chemical
exposures that have just you know kind
of persisted uh and remained in the
population and it's kind of tough to
work through that but it's not
known if I'm sat down all day is that
going to have an impact on my sperm
count as well because of the heat
generated from me just sitting here um
and or if I'm a if I'm a cyclist or
someone that's doing you know sat down
on my testicles doing something warm
people have looked at sort of different
occupations where you sit a lot um and
there are associations like drivers you
know taxi drivers truck drivers they
certainly can have changes in sperm
count you know probably due to heat you
know again I think it could be a
combination of sort of sitting all day
is also you know from probably other
health standpoints is not great and
cycling too you know people have looked
at sort of peak athlete cyclist and
there are differences in Seaman quality
um but you know Peak cyclists you know
they do a lot to their body and so you
know it's possible that there could be
other effects too but you know looking
at men that sort of recreationally cycle
too I think that the number that I use
there's a study that showed um if you
cycle over five hours a week there can
be lower sperm counts so you know I
talked to men about that when they do
cycle you know more than that you know
potentially taking breaks trying to
stand up if we think the mechanism is
heat to try and sort of circulate air
out the area to spend some time out of
the saddle if possible what about men
with big thighs
yeah well I think you know obesity is an
issue there's certainly a strong
correlation between body mass index and
semen quality so as men get bigger sperm
counts go down um and so heat is
certainly one of the the possible
mechanisms for that just kind of
insulating that area warming things up
can kind of do it you know obesity also
affects you know the kind of hormonal
axis as well so that also may be at play
too because you know there's kind of a
normal stimulation that's given by your
pituitary in your brain that tells your
testicles to make sperm make testost
tone and some of that's also affected by
obesity as well so it's probably a
combination but that is something I I do
think about when I see you know my
patients and we do talk about sort of
heat exposures as well and see if
there's you different sort of strategies
they can use to try and allow more
circulation in the area is there a link
between um sperm counts and alcohol
consumption I think it depends is what I
would say so in general for most kind of
moderate use I would say kind of a drink
a day um and some people think that no
amount of alcohol you know is safe but
probably if you look at these studies
looking at maybe a drink or two a day it
probably doesn't correlate too strongly
with Sean quality but it seems like
there there are some studies say that
when men get to three a day so maybe 20
a week there can be lower quality uh in
semen and there was also another study
that we did looking at you know to see
if some men are more susceptible to to
alcohol intake so there are some um East
Asian men and women that have a mutation
and one of the enzymes that's used to
metabolize alcohol and so they
accumulate what's called acid alahh
which is a toxin actually and so when
they drink they flush I don't know if
you have any friends that have this but
um we hypothesize that you know when you
have this you know this large load of
this chemical in your body that leads to
Flushing headache dizziness um maybe it
also affects semen quality and it turns
out that it does so for these men that
have this mutation um when they drink
their sperm movement goes down a little
bit
so it turns out that there's actually a
reasonable number of men on Earth that
have this you know it's probably in some
populations up to 50% like in Taiwan um
you know it's very common in Japan you
with chinese vietnamese ancestry so I
think it's something to be aware of and
I think usually you know men do know if
they flush when they drink it's probably
because they have this mutation and Al
alahh dehydrogenase too so you know for
those men I think that it's probably
better to you know avoid alcohol or uh
just to sort of be aware because um it
can affect SE quality if I if I came
into your clinic and I said Dr Michael I
I'm trying to have a kid with my partner
and I want to make sure that everything
I'm doing is giving me the best chance
of having a kid what is what's the list
of things because this is basically
where I am at my in my life now I'm 31
years old I want to have a kid I'm
ideally want to have four of them and
I'm thinking about the time my partner's
the same age as me we're almost
identical in age
and she's 31 so we're we've got you know
we want to have these kids before 40
ideally so I kind of need to get get
going get going you know what I mean so
so what can I do to give myself the best
possible chance of increasing my
fertility my sperm count so that we have
those four kids that I want over the
next nine years was the four number it
was something you came up with before
that the tax incentive
or yeah we are planning to move to
Hungary so there you go was really it's
really about tax avoidance it's not that
I I want kids um no I come from a family
of four so for some reason I've always
had four in my head I I think she's fine
with it as well I think we've we've
we've chatted and she's she's happy with
four to six no it's a good number not
had six signed off but four for sure
what would you say to me then so I think
you know we look at you know your
overall health um you know we' see any
risk factors you had obviously we're
talking about saunas hot tubs find out
you know how you exercise if there's
things that you do that are not you know
good
um look at you know if any medical
conditions that you have surgeries that
you've had some of those can put men at
risk for for that if there's any
medications you're on there can be
medications that affect it and then
we'll do an exam um so we don't have to
do that here in front of the
cameras I'm
down U I do have yeah I do have a
California medical license but um so you
know we want to make sure we look at the
sides of the testicles make sure all the
other structures are where they're
supposed to be um you know one of the
basic evaluations will be a seman
analysis so we'll measure how much comes
out look at how many sperm there are
look at how many are moving look at
their shape as well and then usually we
also check hormones as well so we'll
check testosterone again sort of this
very male hormone the testicle does two
things it makes sperm makes testosterone
so we check that and then usually we
check some other hormones involved in
the kind of hormonal axis that controls
reproduction and that's usually what we
start again fertility is a team sport so
I would encourage your partner to also
get evaluated as well um and we'd see
you know depending on kind of sperm
counts usually then we're able to sort
of counsel about you know how likely you
are to be able to achieve um you know
those four kids but you know again it if
you're kind of thinking about four I I
would agree that you should get
started fertility issues we tend to
think of it I think there's a stereotype
that it's typically the woman who has
the fertility issue and and the man is
okay and I think if you when I looked at
the data that it that's kind of
supported this idea that couples assume
it's the woman that has the fertility
issue is that a misconception it's a
huge misconception yeah so absolutely I
think that you know in United States and
other countries too I think usually you
know women are kind of the gatekeeper of
fertility everybody assumes that that's
where the issue lies but if you actually
look at you know the data probably about
half the time there's a male Factor
contributing and you know this sort of
stereotype is so prevalent that probably
at least a quarter of the time in the
United States the man's never evaluated
and he could be you know one of the
issues so some couples may go to IVF you
know for the lone reason of you know
again low sperm count and the man would
never evaluate it and maybe there is a
condition that we can improve maybe he's
on a medicine maybe you know he's going
to the jacuzzi every day you know
something like that that we be able to
reverse you mentioned testosterone would
be one of the things that you would
measure if you were trying to make sure
that my fertility was good male
testosterone decline this is another Hot
Topic you talked about it at the start
of this conversation is it true that
male testosterone is declining and how
much has it declined by yeah so um again
study from this enhan this CDC you know
measuring men every year for the last
several decades if um you know there's
data that shows that testosterone levels
have have gone down over time you know
people have also looked at um you know
other cohorts of men you know from the
2000s the '90s 80s and there's just a
progressive decline in average
testosterone levels over that amount of
time so you know the amounts you know
kind of vary 50 to 100 points but you
know generally these are you know
meaningful measurable amounts in
addition to sort of these kind of cohort
changes where if you kind of you know
look at the average 40-year-old Now
versus you know 10 years ago our our
testosterone levels change too so I
would say that I usually tell men after
the age of 20 your testosterone is going
to go down maybe about a percentage
point every year so as we get older
testosterone does go down and there's
things again that can affect that
trajectory you know men that get more
obese that also affects testosterone
level a portion of all of our
testosterone is converted to estrogen a
lot of that conversion happens in you
know adapost tissue or fatty tissue so
the more kind of extra tissue there is
in the body the more that conversion
will happen and so your you know
effective testosterone levels will be
lower what about movement and exercise
does that have an impact on our
testosterone levels in a significant way
yeah I mean I think that you know the
more walking you do the more active you
are we've looked at that as well you
know step count is directly correlated
to testosterone and you don't have to
take 20,000 steps a day you know 4,000
8,000 steps a day you know just kind of
walking around you know sort of
reasonable amounts it can make a big
difference and I think that um you know
activity is important it probably also
helps Dave off obesity a little bit as
well as another mechanism okay so I'm a
Manchester United fan right now we're
losing a lot I thought you guys have
turned it around yeah I thought so too
until last week okay so if you're if
you're supporting a team that is losing
your testosterone levels likely going to
be lower well I think this is sort of an
acute thing maybe we could do that
experiment right where does that that
research come from that if your team
wins your testosterone increases I don't
remember I I that stud is pretty old I
think that even dated my um training but
I do remember reading that I think that
was one of the articles that get picked
up by the newspaper okay of course why
why does testosterone
matter well I think testosterone is very
important for you know a lot of things I
think it's it's important for our
quality of life so energy level sex
drive mood sleep concentration all those
things are very important um when
testosterone gets very low it also has a
lot of Health implications so muscle
Health bone health heart health so we do
want to keep our levels in a normal
range um because I think it yeah kind of
helps us with our function and our life
uh and happiness how how does the impact
our sort of muscles and Bones I don't
really understand what testosterone is
doing I I kind of think of it as the
chemical that kind of makes you a man I
know women have testosterone too but I I
just think of it's the chemical that
makes my beard grow in my voice deep
yeah well that's what it's doing but
it's anabolic it does help kind of grow
it helps with bone turnover um and kind
of keeps sort of uh you know the
strength of the bone so men that have
very low testosterone levels have you
know frailer bones higher risks of
osteopenia
osteoporosis so um you know I think it
helps with muscle growth bone turnover
bone strength so I think all those
things are um are important they usually
don't get into those problems unless men
are very very low I would say that you
know I don't know you but you know the
average testosterone levels are probably
300 to 900 I would guess probably on the
higher higher end of that um but you
know when are low probably less than 200
100 that's where we start to worry more
about you know bone health muscle health
and so I think that there is some wiggle
but when you get kind of lower than sort
of the normal ranges kind of the 300
range that's when some men do develop
you know some of the symptoms of lower
energy level sex drive problems things
like that so low testosterone typically
means lower sex drive uh it can it's one
of the it's one of the common symptoms
that we see with that does that mean
that if I just take loads of
testosterone my sex drive is going to go
back up you know over the last probably
10 to 20 years the number of
prescriptions of testosterone written in
the US have kind of gone up almost at an
exponential rate and because people did
think of it sort of as a um kind of an
anti-aging kind of Rejuvenation therapy
and so there was hope that it would help
people but if you look at some of the
randomized trials if a man has a normal
testosterone level and you give him
testosterone uh it may not help him that
much even men that have kind of a lowish
testosterone like we talked about sort
of this 300 cut points so I've had
plenty of patients testosterone of 250
let's say so we talk about risks and
benefits of being on testosterone uh
we'll try them on it and you know a lot
of men do feel better but not everybody
some men I don't feel any you know doc I
don't feel any different even though he
get his levels you know from 250 to 500
um and so then it's probably not worth
you know to be on a medicine every day
if it's not helping you I'm not worried
about his bone health you know we'll
check some other measures to make sure
that's okay um so then it's not you know
again when you look at risk and benefits
it's probably not worth it but there's
certainly some men who do who do see
Improvement so is testosterone hurting
some people their testosterone treatment
does it actually have an adverse effect
if you take it basically when you don't
need to I mean even when you do need to
I think it could C sometimes cause
issues yeah there's certainly side
effects to testosterone um you know one
of the big things that I see in my
practice is how testosterone impacts
sperm production um it actually was
tested as a contraceptive by the World
Health Organization because it does low
lower sperm counts in most men I would
say 90% of men now it doesn't do 100% so
it's not that great of the contraceptive
yet they're kind of working on some
other ways to tweak it um but I have
plenty of patients that come in you know
some of them suspect that testosterone
is the issue some don't know um I
remember one couple in particular they
came in as a couple together you know we
measured his sperm count it was Zero we
started talking about risk factors and
he was on testosterone I said well the
best thing to do would be to stop
testosterone um and for his work I'm
going tell you what he did but for his
work he really couldn't stop it um so
there's some other medicines we were
able to add while he continued the
testosterone um and then and then they
ended up with triplets um shortly
thereafter so I think that you know men
need to be aware of it um because that's
you know certainly one of the big risk
factors at least of reproductive age men
is this risk to
fertility so it can impact my sperm
count negatively um I I I saw a quote
from you that said if we take a hundred
of my infertile patients that I see in
the clinic at least five of those men
will be infertile because they're on
testosterone therapy one in 20 infertile
men are that way because of testosterone
as it relates to infertility one of the
things that I've always worried about is
if I take
testosterone then my hair would fall out
yeah so that can do definitely happen so
you know hair loss breast growth acne
those can all occur I would say those
are things that we can monitor so you
know one thing I always tell men is that
we're not trying to get them to superum
right we're just trying to get you to
normal so I think if we monitor it
closely most men you know will do okay
again there are some other therapies
that we can do for men that have side
effects uh you know from those things it
can also affect the thickness of the
blood something called the hematocrit or
we count the number of red blood cells
in the body it can increase that number
so if it gets too high that can be an
issue so that's another number that we
follow there used to be a concern about
um higher rates of heart attack and
stroke with testosterone so there were
some studies done um you know about
maybe 10 year five 10 years ago that
suggested that but a really large trial
just came out uh with about 5 200 men
half of them randomized to testosterone
half not and there was actually no
difference in the risk of cardiovascular
disease so I think that's something that
we can probably put to bed the other
thing that men worried about is increase
of risk of prostate problems prostate
cancer prostate growth and you know that
same trial also showed that um from a
prostate standpoint probably not a lot
of risk as
well do you have many men coming to you
to talk to you about hair loss and
Bolding uh some men do I think one of
the ways that men talk to me about it is
one of the common medication for that is
finasteride right or you know sold on
the trade name propa um and so they want
to understand some of the risks of that
and so you know when that medicine was
approved for a hair loss they you know
again because people that are going to
take it are usually in the reproductive
age they did randomized Placebo control
trials to look at semen quality and it
turns out that it didn't meaningfully
impact things maybe it went down a
little but not a lot um but in sort of
post um you know analyses of some of
this and now seeing lots of patients
coming in we do see men that are on
finasterid some of them are more
susceptible and so one of the
interesting thing about trials is
there's you know kind of inclusion and
exclusion criteria right not not
everybody can be in it and so if men had
sperm counts that were too low they
weren't invited to be in these trials so
for men that you know don't have as much
Reserve as others I think they may be
more susceptible so that's one of the
risk factors finasteride you know the
other thing in aash in addition to
reproductive health is sexual health
that I deal with a lot and there's also
a concern that finasteride impacts
sexual function function in men too so
you know we have these discussions I've
had some men that come in after having
been on finasterid and have you know
different issues with sexual desire low
liido or rectile dysfunction and so then
we you know work through an algorithm to
try and improve that as well this is one
of the things I think about a lot
because I don't want to I don't want to
have a receding hairline and I also
don't want to have a air operation or
anything like that but when I hear about
some of these testosterone replacement
therapies and and such my big concern is
that if I take testosterone maybe not
now cuz I'm you know probably don't need
it right now but maybe when I'm a little
bit older which is when I assume one
would start taking it maybe when I'm
about 50ish on average but there are
younger men that are on it as well for
what reason just because they're low
on what's the sort of symptoms that that
have caused them to take it well I think
there's you know with all things there's
a bell-shaped curve so some men are a
little bit lower some have genetic
conditions you know there are um some
more nefarious testosterone prescribers
so even though men have a normal level
they're offered testosterone to kind of
get in these kind of testosterone
clinics and some men you know if kind of
look at data maybe 10 to 20% of you know
high school athletes have experimented
with testosterone and if you stay on
that too long it can really shut down
your own axis so um if you take
exogenous testosterone so like
testosterone injections or gels your
body stops making it and the longer
you're on it the less likely your body
is able to sort of restart and so for
some of these men you know poor choices
or or whatever they've been on
testosterone for a while and they can't
ever stop I don't know if you've ever
had any experience in it because I know
you focus predominantly on male Health
but um I've had a long conversation
about contraceptive pills with my
partner because she was on she said this
publicly before that she was on a
contraceptive pill for a long time and
then and everyone's relationship with
contraception is different but after
taking it for seven or eight years she
she came off it and her period didn't
happen didn't occur so she really
struggled with that for a while
previously and it made me really you
know it illuminated the fact that when
we start messing with the chemical
balances of our body using pills and
injections and other things we could do
pretty long-term Andor permanent damage
to ourselves and there's no real such
thing as a free lunch is there in
biology and chemistry yeah I think
that's what it comes down to I think a
lot of people have said that if they
tried to get the uh the pill approv now
it would be a much different process and
unlikely to succeed for those kind of
reasons if I have low
testosterone um and I come to see you
what is the typical way of getting a
testosterone replacement therapy is it a
pill is it an injection that I have to
take um I know that it's quadrupled
according to the data in the US since
two since the 2000s which is staggering
but how are people taking testosterone
so there's lots of different ways it can
be taken I think one thing you know
again we talk about all the risks so
fertility is certainly be you know a big
one so if you come in in your 30s you
know I'd ask you about your reproductive
intent so if you have a low testosterone
and you're interested in having four
kids I wouldn't start you on
testosterone directly there's some off
label things um you know so medicines
that we kind of repurpose to help
increase your body's own testosterone um
that we would start with but assuming
that let's say you're in your 60s you're
not interested in fertility then you
know there's gels or patches that you
put on every day testosterone gel or
patch um because that can work well
probably 10 to 20% of men don't absorb
testosterone that well through the skin
the other thing to be aware of is that
there's a risk of um like transference
like to your partner to anybody that
kind of touches your skin so if you have
young kids just to sort of be aware of
but as long as you know you put it on
let it dry put clothes on over it it's
not a big risk um you know again and
also have to be I guess mindful of
laundry as well uh so you know gel's
patches are one there's injections uh
that you can do every usually one to
three weeks on average there's testost
pellets um so these are pellets that
have testosterone they're kind of slow
release so um they're just injected uh
we kind of implant them under the skin
usually in the hip area and those last
probably 3 to six months there's longer
acting injections so those are very
common in Europe um they're kind of
gaining steam in the US but those are
injections that last probably 10 weeks
or so and then there's a new oral
therapy so there's an oral form of
testosterone um that's available as well
I was quite confused on this subjec of
hair loss in testosterone because I
couldn't figure out if low testosterone
causes me to bold and have a receding
hairline or if it's high testosterone
that causes me to bold and have a
receding hairline or if it's both I mean
it could be both I think usually we
think about it as um as higher levels
okay it's funny because I've I've
wondered before whether me doing a lot
of exercise which is I guess increasing
my testosterone levels is going to
accelerate my Bolding in receding
Airline anything that's good for your
heart should be good for your hairline
so I would exercise I think that's good
but what if I'm doing like Iron Mans and
Thousand Mile runs and all that kind of
thing which you see in in certain groups
so I don't know that it I I do think
it's possible to OV exercise I don't
know if it'll affect your hairline but
um you know I testosterone levels it can
affect testosterone levels I do think
that it's you know when you kind of
exercise to the point of exhaustion you
know we do see declines in sperm counts
as well so hormone levels can certainly
be affective did um CU my cortisol goes
up so my testosterone I'm I guess goes
down can go down sometimes interesting
what about penis size I heard you did
some pretty Landmark research which
suggests that the length of a man's
penis is increasing decade over a decade
in terms of um men that are being born
and boys that are going through puberty
yeah so um this this study also got a
lot of attention so um you know similar
to how we've tracked testosterone levels
over time or sperm counts over time you
know for different reasons investigators
have measured penal length you know to
kind of give normative data across
different populations to understand how
different surgeries or conditions may
affect um penal length so you know we
looked at you know all the studies and
there were there were dozens and so we
kind of pulled all that together this
was tens of thousands of men and just
looked at sort of average pile length
over time and so you know again based on
some of the data on Seamon quality we
would have expected things to get
shorter over time and also because we're
more obese now you know the way that
penises are measured is you kind of pull
the penis on stretch and use a tape
measure some sort of ruler measuring
device so if the there's kind of more
gut you know more fat in theory length
should be a little bit shorter now than
it used to be um but it turns out at
least when you measure a Rec penile
length uh that penises are longer now
than they used to be uh and so over the
you know past 30 years or so they've
probably gone up about
25% why I mean it's it's a good question
I think one hypothesis we had kind of
looking at sort of different endocrine
you know abnormalities um and changes in
puberty is that if men go through
puberty or boys go through puberty
earlier that tends to correlate with
longer penis length and so if we are
shifting puberty again through these
different environmental exposures maybe
that is leading to you know changes in
general development and this may be one
of the consequences of it does this have
any Upstream like implications for
for sex I think that well the numbers
we're talking about shouldn't be um you
know kind
of enough to make a big big difference
um you know people as this study came
out we talked about you know very
enterprising patients kind of reaching
out sending emails some people
hypothesize that this was kind of
natural selection so it's it's hard to
know um but again it's it's a very short
period of time so it's hard to believe
that there's you know that's kind of at
play do you have many people that come
into your practice that are with
erectile dysfunction yeah so that's
another very common condition we see you
if you look at men over the age of 40
over half have some trouble with
erection so very very common hundreds of
millions of men all over the world are
afflicted we don't talk about this much
um what what is the cause of this and
are you seeing it increase over time the
the prevalence of erectile dysfunction I
mean I think the rates are going up and
I think you know the risk factors you
know are the same risk largely the same
risk factors that affect heart disease
so you know diabetes obesity high blood
pressure high cholesterol you know
minority of these um conditions can be
caused by low testosterone sometimes the
outcomes of you know surgical treatment
for pelvic cancers as well um but by and
by and large it's vascular just it's a
blood flow issue because I used to think
it was more of like a like a hormonal
thing or a psych psychology thing like
you know sexual anxiety or some kind of
you know change to our testosterone
levels is causing us to struggle with
getting erections now you're saying it's
about so I think you know psychogenic
used to be thought of like you're saying
used to be thought of as the kind of the
primary ideology um and maybe for some
you know populations it could be a
little bit more common but generally for
most men sort of all crummers it's going
to be a blood flow issue a vascular
organic cause and how would you get
about treating um erectile dysfunction
um so there's a lot we can do we do want
to you know kind of reverse anything
that we can kind of understand where the
man's coming from find out if there's
you know new relationship or other kind
of factors you know for men like you
know suggesting that we do s like kind
of suspect a psychogenic component work
with sex therapists as well um but for
other men you know I always like to be
very positive it's like to say you know
as long as you have a penis we can
always make it hard so there's a lot
that we can do so usually we start with
pills um like bagra sealas does that
work for people it works probably 60 to
70% of the time so that does work well
um even for men with a psychogenic cause
sometimes it can kind of help reset the
system a little bit you know convince
them and their body that everything is
working well like a placebo effect well
it's I think to some extent but even
more than that because it does work it
does help and then I think once they
kind of regain that confidence if there
was some sort of traumatic event
traumatic relationship it can help um
improve things pills aren't enough or
they don't like those or they have side
effects from those um there's other
therapies so there's medicines you can
actually put in the tip of the penis
like a gel or a repository we can teach
men to give themselves injections in the
penis oh I just got shiver my bu there's
certainly a uh a kind of a a
psychological um sort of fear of that
but it does work well probably works 80
to 90% of the time um there is something
called a vacuum erection device so it's
like a plastic cylinder you put over the
penis that sucks blood into the penis
kind of treats it like a balloon and
then you put a band at the base to trap
blood inside um and there's even surgers
we can do to put a device inside the
penis so whenever want whenever a man
wants to be hard he can be hard I didn't
know there was surgery you could do it a
surgery mhm what does that do it puts a
so there there's two main flavors of it
there's um or forms maybe that's a
better term uh there's one called a
malleable so it's bendable so it kind of
puts this sort of bendable um metal it's
a metal core with sort of a plastic um
kind of covering so when they don't want
to have sex you bend it down when you're
ready for sex you bend it up um or
there's inflatable versions so when
you're whenever you're ready for sex
there's uh basically a pump that goes in
the scrotum and you just Pump It Up and
moves fluid into the cylinders and
you'll get a rigid
erection is that increasing in
popularity I think you know there it's
made by a few manufacturers in in the US
or in the world um and I so I think the
data is not as freely available I mean
in my practice I've seen more and more
of it um we're seeing more patients come
in I also say that you know my practice
is getting a little bit more mature with
time as I get older and so you know
naturally you know more patients kind of
hear about these different things but it
does work well I always say it's a self-
selected population right we don't hold
men down and force them to get it but
generally they're very happy probably
90% of men are very happy they'd
recommend it to their friends Partners
very happy recommend it to other couples
and you just you press a button and you
get like a you can it's a pump right now
they are working actually on um either a
fob or like a phone app that'll kind of
automatically inflate it to make it
easier for Pati I had no idea it sounds
like sci-fi or something it sounds like
it's
um sounds like something you might see
on like a YouTube video that people are
working on in like 20 30 years time but
to to know that men have that installed
now is amazing yeah yeah the I mean it's
uh yeah it's very common um the youngest
patient I put it in is about 20 the
oldest is in his 80s what was the is it
seen as like a last option in the that
menu of options that you presented there
where like the first option probably
Viagra and in terms of popularity is it
a last port of core I think for a lot of
men it's the most aggressive but some
men don't want to do like you had a
reaction to the injection I think that's
a very common reaction there are
certainly some advantages to it compared
to others you know for Viagra for
example even though it's obviously the
easiest it's a pill you know there's
some side effects with it and there's
also you know a lag time right you have
to take the pill wait an hour wait 30
minutes something like that whereas this
you know the penal prosthesis you know
if you just pump it up it's ready to go
in seconds so it can be very spontaneous
so patients like that um you know some
patients don't you know they have other
medications so they can't take pills
they don't like some of the other kind
of intermediate options that we have
shock wve therapy for erections does
that work and what is it so the idea is
that um as kind of the name implies
you're sending shock waves into the
penis um and the energy is induces kind
of some microt trauma which induces new
blood vessel growth is the
hypothesis and so you know the hope is
that with you know getting better blood
vessel better blood flow into the penis
can improve the quality of erections so
there have been some studies that do
show benefit it's still considered
experimental um because I think the data
is not yet conclusive but I think for
men with milder forms of erectile
dysfunction it can help you know maybe
the men that are on Viagra or sometimes
on Viagra may we can get them off those
pills um but I think we need more data
uh to kind of understand really the kind
of best Target population for it you
talk about pelvic flaws as well um when
we typically think about pelvic flaws we
tend to think of women you know things
like these keegle exercises that people
talk about but is it important for us to
think about that as a man as well our
sort of pelvic floor strength and our
pelvic floor muscles I think in some
conditions I think if you're not
thinking about it it's probably okay
you're not having a lot of problems um
but it can be a trigger for some men so
that can be an ideology of some
different um like problems with
urination you see men with very tight
you know pelvic floors and they have a
lot a lot of urgency to urinate they
urinate frequently can also lead to
scrotal pain sometimes as well um
because there's a lot of muscles as
you're kind of pointing out in the area
and sometimes if they're under tension
um if they're not um you know properly
kind of trained and they're they can
kind of trigger some other areas and so
um for some of these different
conditions um we do kind of work with
pelvic floor physical therapists to
train patients you know how to you know
again relax the area strength in the
area increase flexibility of some of
those muscles which can help is it
plausible that doing pelvic floor
exercises will improve one's sex
life I mean I think that unless we're
treating a problem I would be very
hesitant you know one of my favorite
saying is the enemy of good is better so
if things are good you know to try and
get better you know there always there's
always going to be like you said there's
no free lunch there's always some
trade-offs so I think if you work on
kind of over strengthening the pelvic
floor it could lead to of these other
dysfunctions so you don't want to end up
with a floor that's too tight or too
tense is there any correlation between
these things like your pelvic floor
strength your testosterone your sperm
count and a variety of the different
cancers that we see in men things like
testicular cancer and prostate cancer so
um I think with with uh pelvic floor
kind of strength I think I usually kind
of think about that as separate from uh
cancer risk but for test cancer you know
one of the risk factors for that is some
men are born without testicles in their
scrotum uh so that's a risk factor an un
so-called undescended testicle low sperm
counc associated with testicular cancer
there was one study I know of years ago
that looked at um you know comparing
sort of sexual health to prostate cancer
risk found that men that ejaculated more
frequently had lower risk of prostate
cancer the thought was that you know
there was inflammation that you're kind
of clearing out by frequent ejaculations
I think this study had men ejaculating
30 times a month and showed a lower risk
so that's
that's a lot um but that was one study
that said at least it's not dangerous to
ejaculate more frequently but it's not
something that I generally recommend to
men to lower their risk if we talk about
testicular cancer then um what are the
the common symptoms of testicular cancer
yeah so usually it tends to be
relatively asymptomatic I think that you
know the classic symptom would be a firm
painless mass that men find in the
scrotum so if you know um there used to
be there are screening guidelines um
even though our preventative Services
Task Force thinks that you know the
utility of doing it for you know
reproductive ageement to their scrotums
may lead to more anxiety than actually
you know Finding test this cancer
because it's such a rare cancer so it's
more likely a man's going to just worry
themselves than actually you know
diagnose in early cancer but the
recommendations used to be that you
would you know once a month in the
shower kind of feel yourself and if you
feel something new or something abnormal
you know bring it to your doctor's
attention you I certainly see a lot of
men with this concern do an exam say you
know that's normal or if there's
something that we're worried about um
we'll kind of dive a little deeper what
is the demographic that are most likely
to get testicular cancer is it something
that affects young people as well as
older people it's usually mostly a
cancer of young men so I would say
probably 20s to 40 uh is usually the the
kind of the Prime demographic why is it
a cancer of young men is there any sort
of physiological reason for that well I
mean it's a you know reproductive age
cancer so that's the prime reproductive
years um so it's possible that it kind
of correlates with you know sperm C
declining with older age there is
another slight increase for men in their
50s and 60s um but again it's such a it
is a very rare cancer so I usually kind
of quote probably one in 100 thousand
men um are going to be diagnosed with it
so one in 100 thousand it's pretty it's
fairly uncommon but prostate cancer is
more more common prostate cancer is more
common yeah so that we you know in the
United States probably at least 200,000
men every year um some studies say that
you know if you live long enough
everybody will be diagnosed with
prostate cancer but again most men with
prostate cancer die of heart disease
just like every other man in this
country so most men you know with
prostate cancer die with it not of it um
so usually it's a slower growing disease
although there's some that are more
aggressive and that's why we screen for
it and treat it I read a stat that it
affects one out of every seven men
prostate cancer yes okay so what is a
prostate so a prostate is it's a walnut
shaped organ yeah um it's just
underneath the bladder so the way that
we're shaped is we have our bladder
which FS with urine from our kidneys and
then we urinate out the urethra you know
out the penis um and so the prostates
just at that kind of intersection
between the urethra um and the bladder
and it really has a function in
reproduction so it produces about 20% of
the fluid of our ejaculate and it
produces a lot of the different
chemicals and sugars that support um and
protect the sperm in the female
reproductive tract so after reproduction
it doesn't really have a lot of you know
benefit mostly it just causes issues
because it gets bigger with age so it
leads to urinary symptoms and then
obviously it it's a cancer risk as well
as we get older okay so we typically get
prostate cancer once we've stopped using
the prostate for reproduction yes so
does it have a role outside of
reproduction I guess because it's a
gland it might be regulating hormones
long long after we're using it for
reproduction reasons uh it doesn't
really have any useful benefit if we
could find a way to remove the prostate
without causing any complications that'd
probably be a reasonable thing to do but
unfortunately every treatment we have
does have some uh some side effects just
given where it is anatomically it's
right by a lot of the structures are
important for erections and for
reproduction so when people have
prostate treatment because they've got a
prostate cancer are they getting their
prostate removed some men get it removed
some men um have radio therapy um to
sort of kill all the prostate cells and
there's other kind of energy therapies
that are delivered like um highfrequency
ultrasound can sometimes be delivered
there's also something called
cryotherapy where you can freeze the
prostate you know usually these are done
in kind of targeted Fashions where you
can look at the prostate look at MRI
imaging of the prostate um look at
biopsy patterns to try and figure out
where the cancer is so usually the whole
gland is treated but sometimes you know
I think newer modalities are trying to
just treat you know a particular portion
how often do you think we should get our
prostate checked and what are the
symptoms that we should be looking for
from a sort of a urinary standpoint I
think that if urination bothers you you
should talk to your primary care doctor
or your urologist about it you know if
you're waking up at night if you feel
like you have to pee too frequently if
it burns to pee things like that um so
and that sometimes is due to prostate
enlargement prostate issues it could
also be due to a tight pelvic floor as
well from a cancer standpoint usually we
check uh blood tests called a PSA
prostate specific antigen and you know
there's different screening uh screening
guidance that's made usually start you
know in men in their 50s or so um and
Screen every year or two till a man
turns 70 you know some of the guidance
or some of the screening patterns will
vary based on family history which is a
very strong predictor of cancer risk is
there anything I can do or is there any
research that gives me advice on how to
treat my body in such a way where I
reduce my risk of prostate cancer you
know we talked about some of these you
know risks for erectile dysfunction
right like obesity diabetes I think
those same things can also play a risk
um in so a lot of these prostate
conditions too so good diet exercise
maintaining good body weight I think all
those are important avoiding drinking
water before bed
well that'll help with you know
sometimes waking up at night so for some
men that are most bothered by you know
so-called noctua or waking up at night
to urinate I think you know trying to
dehydrate yourself you know saying I'm
not going to drink any fluid after 7
o'clock at night or six o'clock at night
so that you're more likely to get you
know a full night's sleep you know
waking up once at night is not that
unusual um but if it becomes a little
bit more frequent you know that's one
strategy that some men use okay so
reducing my water consumption at night
time isn't going to reduce my chance of
having prostate cancer right okay fine
what about spicy foods so I think in a a
similar way that can also affect um some
of the symptoms it shouldn't affect your
prostate symptom thing M ah okay is
there any is there any studies that show
ways that we can reduce our prostate
risk that aren't just the sort of health
and what sort of Lifestyle related
things is there anything linked to I
don't know other parts of our lifestyle
like our use of technology or alcohol
consumption or anything at all not to my
knowledge I think that you know Asian
ore uh
the defoliant that was used during
Vietnam war that was found to be a risk
factor for prostate cancer so um I don't
know why you would but try and try and
avoid Ancient Orange um but otherwise
there are not a lot of modifiable risk
factors other than the ones that we
talked about I think that you know
cancer risk goes up with obesity you
know thought to be due to different
things but maybe inflammation and things
like that so I think kind of living a
healthy life I think hopefully will keep
you on a healthy trajectory I'm the
first person to lean into new tools to
support my productivity but also to save
me time and one that that's been a real
gain for both me and my team as nordvpn
who I'm pleased to say are a sponsor of
this podcast I don't think many people
know just how useful having nordvpn can
be for you for both business but also
for personal needs personally I use
nordvpn for online privacy and for
security because I'm often traveling and
working on the go connecting to public
Wi-Fi networks which can often be quite
risky nordvpn has been helpful for me
but also the whole executive team here
including Jack who's the producer of our
podcast and The Wider production team
who use it for fast file downloads and
accessing local networks especially when
we're shooting the podcast in different
parts of the world like New York where I
am now and La nordvpn is incredibly
simple to use and it's officially the
fastest VPN available nord's 30day
moneyback guarantee makes it totally
risk-free too and it only equals roughly
the cost of buying a coffee try it out
for yourself by going to nordvpn.com
doac what is the what are the most
important things that we haven't talked
about that patients come into your
Clinic can speak to you about as it
relates to reproductive Health you know
hormones everything in between well
another condition that I see men for a
lot is something called ponis disease
which is a curvature of the penis so um
you know the way erections worth work is
everything swells you know there's sort
of these kind of tough tissue layers in
the penis that trap blood inside and
sometimes Scar Tissue can form on those
layers um for different reasons it's
thought maybe microt trauma some men do
remember sort of a traumatic sexual
episode that leads to an injury and scar
formation and you can imagine if there's
scar tissue in there everything will not
um you know kind of expand in a uniform
fashion so you can get a curvature
deviation so some of these men have you
know 90 degree curves to their penis um
and so you know whether it goes up or
down it makes can make sex pretty
challenging um and so that's another
condition we see I think it's important
for men to know I think again like it's
just similar to erectile dysfunction I
think you know men are sometimes you
know a little bit reticent to talk about
some of these conditions but it's fairly
common probably 5 to 10% of men are
affected and there are effective
treatments for this as well so I think
just as sort of a public service
announcement um if men are suffering
from this again talk to your doctor
because there are treatments that we can
we can offer okay so let's conclude then
if I want to make sure that my sperm
count remains very very high um so I can
have those four kids and I want to make
sure my testosterone levels remain at a
healthy sort of balance let's say is it
sort of 4 500 is G milligrams is it yeah
nanograms per deciliter okay nanograms
per deciliter want to keep it in that
sort of healthy range and I want to have
Rock our directions okay so that I can
have the four kids that I mentioned mhm
what is the the advice that you would
give that is broadly applicable to
everybody without you having to run my
my blood tests and all those things and
this is really a conclusive point the
first one that I've heard is about sort
of lifestyle and dietary choices is
there anything that I definitely
shouldn't be eating if I'm trying to to
become optimal in these three areas
again people have looked at sort of
different diets which can affect health
and reproductive Health you know more
specifically so I think generally
healthy foods are a good idea you know
whole grains fruits vegetables you know
usually the control group for all these
is like a western diet you know like you
know processed foods fast food things
like that foods that have a lot of fat
high calorie those you and you know some
of them also the packaging has you know
some of these same kind of chemicals
that we talked about earlier so I think
trying to avoid some of those I think is
a good idea yeah sugar um Sugar's okay
okay um unless again sort of high
calorie foods or things to to try and
avoid um if you have any medical
conditions you know I think that trying
to get those treated you know sometimes
men do worry that you know if you're
taking a pill for something it may
affect your fertility um but you know I
think just generally being healthy
anything that's good for your heart is
going to be good for fertility so I
think it's a good idea to get that you
know treated there is a study um out of
Japan that I always quote about this so
this was study that looked at all
patients that came in with male
infertility um and tried to figure out
who they helped right and so they wanted
to see if they could predict who was
likely to benefit from a Urologic
concultation and who was not and so they
looked at you know Baseline sperm count
that wasn't predictive of who was going
to benefit Baseline testosterone level
wasn't age wasn't some men had this
condition called a verical which has
dilated veins in the scrotum so about
15% of all men have them um infertile
men maybe about 40% have them so you
know the testicles are outside the body
like we talked about and having larger
veins impairs normal temperature
regulation um and so if you fix those it
turns out most of those men are going to
improve their sperm count um but the
other really interesting finding is that
they also found that men that had a
comorbidity treated had improvements so
the data they provided as men that had
high blood pressure if they got that
under control their sperm counts went up
about
25% so you know a lot of times you know
the first time men see the doctor men
don't go to the doctor a lot right
unless there's a problem right unless
they're in pain or some other you know
condition um so sometimes my patients
the first time I've ever seen anybody is
they seeing me to try and have a baby um
and so it's an opportunity to you know
make them take a little bit more
ownership of their health you know if
they've never had a blood pressure check
check that blood sugar cholesterol all
those things are you know ways to
improve their health or opportunities to
improve reproductive Health but you know
overall health as well so I think that's
another thing to be kind of mindful of
what about depression then our mental
health and the role that that will have
on our fertility are erectile
performance and all of those things is
there correlation there there's strong
correlation yeah so I think we do see a
strong correlation between erectile
dysfunction and depression you know if
you look at men with erectile
dysfunction I think up to 20% it you
know may have some form of depression um
and we sometimes worry that some of the
treatments can also you know exacerbate
sexual dysfunction but I think trying to
get men on a better path is important I
think it's also important to work you
again with a therapist as well you know
so that you kind of attacking these
things from multiple you know multiple
angles you know generally most of these
medicines you know probably have not
been tested you know in terms of
reproductive Health um there's some
studies that say that some of these may
affect seman quality but I think those
studies are limited so I think you know
generally if men are on these medicines
we're not sure and I think it's helping
them um you know we try and sort of you
know carry on and persevere because I do
want them to get the benefit of some of
these therapies what about childhood
trauma and the role that plays you must
see that show up in your practice this
yeah I mean I think it certainly can
affect Sexual Health you know pretty
profoundly I think you know when you do
suspect you know kind of this sort of
psychogenic component I think you know
we do try and be again like talked about
very optimistic about options that are
available um but working with the
therapist working with a sex therapist
to come up with sort of a good sort of
strategy and plan to kind of get um you
know men through you know some of these
issues um so they can have you know a
fulfilling sex life anything else that I
need to do to improve these things
Topline things so lifestyle TR you know
we've talked about food exercise we've
talked about as well as a way to improve
at least our testosterone levels yeah
sleep I guess might be a important
sleep's important too sleep's
interesting because it's um it's what's
called a U-shaped Association so it's
it's possible to get too much sleep so
you know you probably want sort of an
ideal amount probably seven to nine
hours is usually that's been associated
with better seamen quality for men that
get less seamen quality tends to be a
little lower for men that get too much
sleep uh you know again men that have
you know are able to sleep 12 13 14
hours a day there may be other things
going on there maybe there's some
underlying depression or something those
men tend to have lower semen quality but
you know I think sleep I think is
certainly important there's also been
studies looking at weight loss as well
you know I think it's obviously easy to
say lose weight um but it's not always a
straightforward to do um but there is
you know a nice study that came out a
few years ago where men were randomized
to you know weight loss program on a
very low calorie diet 800 calories a day
um for a few weeks and then they lost
you know weight and then they follow
them for the rest of the year um and so
this is important because men that were
able to keep weight off were able to
maintain the benefits of their sperm
count versus men that were you know kind
of fell off the exercise routine they
ended up gaining back you know their
weight and then their sperm counts
declined again uh one of these arms
actually also had one of these you know
hot glp1 analoges as well and so even
men that were on those that kind of help
them keep their weight loss were also
able to maintain sperm count so patients
do ask about that a lot you know I was
just going to ask about obviously as
zexs exploded and there's many other
forms of this sort of
glp1 um sort of fat loss injections I
was wondering if that had any
consequences on fertility so again
there's only one study that that did
study it and it did seem to show benefit
so it doesn't cause any harm as long as
you maintain weight loss with it you
know you do seem to see Improvement you
know in contrast um you know some men
also ask about like bariatric surgery
which you know again may be declining a
little now with these you know very
effective medications but interestingly
for bariatric surger like by like
gastric bypass I don't know if this is
popular in Europe or the United Kingdom
but for some obese individuals um there
are surgeries that can be done to help
sort of reroute intestinal absorption um
so you can lose weight with that there's
also something I thought you meant the
gastric band thing there's gastric bands
too yeah so there different ways that
it's been done and so with all those um
actually uh tends to decrease sperm sort
of right paradoxically so you would
think that if you lost weight your sperm
counts would improve but it turns out
with these surgeries sperm counts
actually declined some of them some
actually men went from a reasonable
sperm count to zero so the thought was
that you know it's the trauma trauma of
a surgery potentially you know um there
are you know some vitamins minerals are
important too so um you know without
that normal absorption that occurs in
the intestines that could also lead to
infertility you know that was sort of a
concern and we were wondering if that
same thing would happen with you know
these newer medications um but it
doesn't seem like it so again the glp1
analog seem like they safe safe form of
weight loss at least when we're looking
at semen quality as an outcome what
about supplementation is there any
supplements one might recommend I guess
it's difficult for you to recommend
supplements but are there any sort of
vitamins or minerals that are typically
deficient in people that have have
infertility issues so I think there is
some data that antioxidants can improve
fertility so it's sort of a very broad
group um of things that have been tested
berries and stuff is that like yeah dark
berries yeah those certainly can have a
lot um but you know I usually tell you
know patients to take a multivitamin
they do make special male fertility
Blends like if you were to look it up on
the internet or Amazon or other
platforms there are special fertility
Blends that have kind of some of them
have you know looked at the data and try
and pick out you know specific
supplements that are thought to be more
beneficial coenzyme Q um is a powerful
antioxidant that has shown some benefit
for fertility so I think that's
something else that you try and Empower
patients and they can do that too and
that that can help protein does that
play a role in fertility or testosterone
I think you know again sort of part of a
balanced meal part of a balanced sort of
diet I think it's important what's your
mission from here on what are you going
to do for the next 10 years if you had
to ha it a guess what's are you going to
do is it more of the same or are you
going to are you interested in changing
um focus at all slightly or are you
going to just continue to do research on
these subjects what's your big sort of
decade Mission yeah I mean this really
gets me up in the morning and this is
the stuff that I like to do like late at
night as well I mean I really passionate
about this trying to understand you know
why we see this link between fertility
and health why sperm couns are declining
because I think the more we understand
about it we can you know hopefully
mitigate some of these risks um also
like to hopefully you know through you
know information channels and platforms
like this you know hopefully engage more
of the community to try and come up with
some therapies you know for male
fertility I think you know we talked
about some of the things that can be
done but there's no you know in in the
United States there's the Food and Drug
Administration that sort of oversees all
you know Therapeutics and there's no FD
approved therapy for male fertility
which is really a shame especially
because you know again we have this data
that it's becoming more prevalent
existential right as a species so it'd
be nice if there was some so try and get
more engagement from the scientific
Community from the pharmaceutical
Community um to try and you know see
that opportunity um because I think
that'll be very important for for you
know for our Fields but again you know I
think like you said sort of more of the
same in some ways but I think trying to
understand some of these questions in a
lot more detail so that we can you know
really help these men is there of all
the subjects we've discussed today is
there a particular part of it that
concerns you the
most well I think you know when we're
talking about sperm counts declining I
do worry that that is a barometer of
health and so it may be that you know in
addition to men's reproductive Health
just our overall health is declining you
know when we look at sort of the health
of fathers over time we've seen you know
fathers are getting a little older you
know we talked about that but you know
with that comes more comorbidities right
higher rates of hypertension hyper
lipidemia you know other things and that
sometimes can have sort of
transgenerational impacts so like a
father that has high blood pressure or
you know is obese that child is you know
a slightly higher risk of having some
other issues later on so trying to
understand that again if there's maybe
opportunities to try and figure out what
in that sperm is a little different
maybe we can turn that switch off to try
and you know prevent that I think those
are all things I don't want to be
alarmist about this these risks are all
very very low um but I think there's a
lot of opportunities um you know I think
one of the reasons I got into it I think
is because male reproductive Health was
really wide open so I think there's
still a lot of opportunities to try and
improve
it what would you say to a man that's
listening to this that's struggling with
any of the things we've discussed what
is what is your your closing message for
them well I think I would just try and
be optimistic and hopeful I think
there's a lot that we can do I think
that you know it takes a lot of Bravery
you know to go in and see doctors about
some of this thing and some of these you
know different these different issues
but you know it's what we're used to
dealing with and I think there's uh you
know plenty of options that are
available so I would just encourage them
to you know talk to friends but you know
men talk to their primary care doctor
talk to their urologist come see
urologist you have a very broad platform
so I think if there's couple struggling
they've only seen gynecologists I would
encourage them to maybe see you a male
reproductive specialist as well to try
and get some other perspectives we have
a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next not knowing who they're
leaving it for the question that's been
left for you is a tricky one it is
what's one thing you would do to change
the
world I guess one thing that I would do
to change the world I guess is certainly
um appropo of our conversation was that
I would make um try and make policy that
all governments would pay for
infertility services so that this is a
universal benefit for all of humanity I
think that would certainly help open up
the doors for a lot of people that don't
have resources for it kind of hesitant
to use it um and hopefully that would
again solves some of the issues that we
talked about from a demographic
standpoint what would that do for
Humanity we' be having more kids I guess
we'd be happier in in our relationships
potentially I mean yeah I think it could
do all that I think that you know I
guess from from a father standpoint
having a child again increases longevity
um decreases cardiovascular risk um
increasing from a sort of societal
perspective having you know um getting
getting to that replacement level sort
of maintain population I think that's
again existential for a society um
increase the tax base and all the other
things that are associated with that and
the workforce it's very difficult in
politics now certainly in United States
um there's a lot of you know ISS isues
that are going on but you know making
policy that really affects everyone I
think would be you know very profound
and I think there's be a lot of um
benefit to
that Dr Michael Eisenberg thank you so
much for your time and thank you for the
work that you're doing because you know
you're uh you're helping to ultimately
to create families and to also alleviate
a lot of the stress and anxiety and
worry and concern um people have about
their reproductive health and I think
it's an incredible service to humanity
to be doing that and especially at the
time when we're in where it feels like
it's more needed than ever before and
frankly the direction of travel isn't
fantastic um as it relates to some of
these big issues like you know
testosterone and fertility and um but
it's it's really important for you
people like you that have the
information that are doing the re
research to not just keep it in the lab
and not just keep it on Pub Med where
it's very hard for people like me to
access it because we can't bloody read
PubMed um so thank you for for for
making the decision which you don't have
to do to come out and speak on these
subjects in a way that's really
accessible um and inspiring and
empowering for people because I think
that's going to do a tremendous world of
good so thank you thank you my
pleasure how many of you started
thinking about your long-term Health
when you hit 30 for me this was a wakeup
moment of me thinking to myself okay I
probably need to start paying a little
bit more attention now I already felt a
change in myself when I hit 30 with
things like my metabolism my energy
levels so this year is no different Zoe
which is a company I've invested in but
also a company that are a sponsor of
this podcast helps me to make smarter
food choices all based on their world
leading science and my own test results
if I'm ordering food I know how to make
my takeaway so much smarter by adding
things like a side of vegetables to eat
first or choosing the option with the
most fiber Zoe helps me to make that
choice it guides me and coaches me it's
my personalized nutrition coach that I
have on me 24/7 and to help you start
your Zoe journey and start making
smarter choices I'm giving you guys 10%
off when you join Zoe now all you've got
to do is use code ceo1 at the checkout
when you sign up enjoy and let me know
how you get on
[Music]
m